for three whoops
we got an issue
okay here we go
five four three two yes and we're live
hello Lindsey it's happening not much
pleasure to meet you yeah yeah good to
meet you I'm the girl who tags you and
all the disgusting medical history
photos and I'm really looking forward to
grossing out your audience I'm looking
forward to you doing that as well you
have fascinated me with your Twitter
page and you like first of all how you
are a doctor right well I'm a PhD I
can't save anybody's life we can perform
you know Victorian surgery amputation or
something I think anybody can right yeah
is that a real one this is this is a
prop this was a real fun thing to get
through customs when I was coming in
from Britain it's a Victorian amputation
saw it's called the Clockwork saw and
for people who are just listening it's
it's a circular saw and there would have
been a crank that you wound it with and
then you'd release it and it would spin
sort of automatically oh yeah and the
idea was that it would make it faster
but the reason why I love this saw so
much is that it was a massive failure
and I don't think we talked about
failure enough in science and medicine
you know all the things that work
there's a lot of things that don't work
and so this guy who invented this saw
when he tried it out it was spinning so
fast that he took off his assistants
fingers oh Jesus Christ
oops it never got out of prototype phase
so I had to recreate it for my youtube
channel
now when you in those old days when they
didn't have antibiotics and antiseptic
and yeah when they saw someone's leg off
or something like that I hope many times
those people live well you could pull
through the operation that was one part
of it but then of course you could die a
post-operative infection yeah so my book
the butchering art really focuses on
this one guy named Joseph Lister who
applies germ theory and develops
antisepsis so germ fighting techniques
and most people don't know who he is but
they know the product Listerine mmm-hmm
so Wistrom was named after him by
I always tell people that so basically a
Lister was a British surgeon and he came
to America in 1876 to convince the
medical community of germs and there was
a guy in the audience and he decided to
create this product Listerine but it
wasn't even a mouthwash in the
nineteenth century it was used to treat
gonorrhea whoa so but also I don't
endorse that you told me throw was
Street I know I I don't endorse that and
I'm sure the Listerine company is not
too pleased I'm talking about that
either
so Listerine now just is for breath
right yeah that's all it does yeah it's
it's it's an antiseptic mouthwash it's
not even any good for you like is it
good to kill all that stuff inside your
mouth like right but you're a medical
historian I'm a medical story I would
say that Dennis would say that that
Listerine is still a good product usage
a bacteria yeah form of it like that I
just used something I switch to
Listerine now in honor of Joseph Lister
so how did he know how did he know that
there was James they were real so let me
let me take you back to you sort of
before he walks on the scene so these
operating theaters they were filled to
the rafters with ticketed spectators
people actually bought tickets to see
someone get their leg hacked off oh well
I you know what no one's asked me that I
don't know how much to take it would
cost for that spectacle now I really
need to look into that what they pay to
watch now right you know we could say
you know and when I sent you my book
signed it and I said I thought that
being strapped to the Victorian
operating theatre was the original fear
factor because I can't imagine anything
worse than being strapped to this table
yeah and so we're talking about before
anesthesia so you're fully awake and one
of my favorite surgeons is this guy
named Robert Liston he's six - he's
really tall for the 19th century and he
could hold you down with his left arm
and he could take your leg off in about
30 seconds oh Jesus which is what you'd
want that's what you'd want but that's
still a long time it is yeah I mean if
we just sat here for 30 seconds with
dead air time and you could think about
you know
yes hacking through that lag just scream
30 seconds I wonder how many people
would be at the end of this podcast like
five people would be still on there
listening so so he was incredibly fast
who's known as the fastest knife in the
West End he would walk in he was a
showman so he'd walk in and he'd say
timey gentleman and you could just hear
the ripple of pocket watches there is
yep there he is and he's using a knife
in that photo yeah so actually the
Liston knife that he invented was this
long bladed knife which they think Jack
the Ripper may have also used which is
why those rumors are that Jack the
Ripper may have been a medical
practitioner but that was a really
common thought right yeah I mean we're
never gonna know who is right it's
unknowable we're we're still kind of
obsessed with this I've heard so many
different versions of that yeah and
recently there was some kind of bogus
DNA test of a shawl that they said
belonged to one of the victims but it's
impossible to prove the provenance of
the object but that was that was listed
so he's 62 he's really tall one of my
favorite stories is he would go so fast
as he was switching instruments he'd
hold these bloody instruments in his
mouth just like how different this one
that's the face I wanted I want to be
just totally disgusted through this
whole segment um and as he was switching
instruments he accidentally cut off his
assistants finger and then as he was
switching instrument he slashed the code
of a spectator and the assistant died of
gangrene the patient died of gangrene
and the spectator died of fright so it's
just right he just did a little brave
blood Wow he got slashed in the with the
jacket and I guess he had a heart attack
from the stress and so it's jokingly
referred to as the only operation with a
300% mortality rate did a good job that
day he killed three three people in one
would you say slashed you mean he cut
the spectator or just no he just cut
their code he was kind of switching
instruments all it took to kill someone
I thought people were tougher back then
well not that guy now he lives forever
in the butchering art is that guy yeah I
had a heart attack
he must have had a heart attack it said
he died afraid maybe that wasn't real
maybe
that course shit doesn't like stories
you know they get blown out of
proportion yeah it just seems like you
cut someone's jacket then I die well
it's you know it's a stressful situation
people are getting their limbs hacked
off you know your blood pressure would
be really high and again it and these
feeders were I mean the the floor of the
operating theater was crowded as well so
they'd have to actually clear the floor
sometime so you can imagine you know
you're strapped to this and the leg
wasn't the worst thing so one of the
tweets that you shared of mine which
your platforms seem to enjoy quite a lot
and sold me a lot of books by the way I
thank you I'm awesome was this story
about this guy who was suffering from a
bladder stone and it got stuck in his
urethra and so out of desperation he
stuck a nail down his penis and he
hammered it to break it up yeah yeah and
yeah people would not sign your platform
for that story so they they obviously
are ready for this how did that work
again that didn't work right it did not
work no he died whoops that guy
definitely died um but it's it really
illustrates how desperate people were
back then and how few options you know
they had there's the image of it I don't
think you'll have to show this on
YouTube Jamie on YouTube really that's
clearly a penis
there's penises in breasts on you shave
me a lot of you think they look at this
more carefully if people want to see it
well tweet Twitter is the most open of
all platforms I'll let you get away with
almost everything you can have porn on
Twitter yeah well I mean I don't have
any problems with Instagram I put that
stuff up but yeah but maybe some things
get removed from Instagram it's really
kind of interested seems to be dependent
upon how many people complain yeah
probably
there's there's always those people out
there looking to be offended I just
think they just want to do something
they just want to press that button yeah
oh there we go
yeah I know I get you know at this point
there's so many objects that that can
cause offence of course
medical history and it's it's you know
there's a lot of dark history
body-snatchers and things like that and
I'm a firm believer that we should tell
these stories openly because they
happened in medicine and science grew as
a result of it but but they're not easy
subjects to discuss with an audience
especially when you have so many
characters and Twitter and you're you're
trying to get out of complex idea right
and also like you're not just there's a
lot of Twitter pages that I follow where
people just try to gross people out
you're actually educating people about
the history and and we all should be
really thankful that these people went
through all the stuff so that we don't
have to yeah absolutely I always say to
my audience so I been going around the
world sort of demolishing romantic
notions about people white and might
think about what it's like to live in
the past because it was pretty pretty
bad and I I have visuals as well and
I've had four men faint so far it's
always been man it's just a commentary
right now it's ancestors of the bitch
those weaklings coming to my lecture and
I think what it is though is on people
think I'm gonna see something gross so
I'm not gonna eat and then their blood
sugar plummets so it's not really the
closest but they're not really prepared
you know and there's interest yeah and
they're standing sometimes I I give
lectures at this incredible museum
called the old operating theatre in
London it's the second oldest in the
world and so you have to stand because
it's like a Victorian operating theatre
and so people lock their knees or
whatever oh wow so you give actual
lectures in the real theaters were these
to cut yeah yeah I did my book launch
there and if people want to see it I
filmed sort of a like a theatrical scene
of a young lister attending an operation
in that theater and it's not my youtube
channel called under the knife and I
really want to get this made into a
movie I'm trying to come into Hollywood
and convince Hollywood that this Quaker
surgeon from the Victorian period
deserves the cinema feature but it is an
epic story he saved more lives than any
other person to ever live look it is an
epic story and for anybody who's ever
gone through operations and I've gone
through several of them we owe those
people a massive debt yeah you don't
have to
awake stretch both my knees
reconstructed wake up and they're fixed
yeah it's amazing yeah and in the past
before anesthesia a lot of times
patients were sat in chairs so they
weren't laid down and they were sat in
these very high chairs so that their
feet dangled so they couldn't brace
against the knife if you think about
pushing off of course um there's a
there's a story about a guy named Robert
Penman and I know we have images and I'm
sure YouTube won't take those down he he
comes to a Robert Liston the fastest
knife in the West End in the 8th in 1828
and he has this huge facial tumour
growing I mean it's been growing for
about eight years it's taking up his
whole face he can't breathe now and
Liston looks at him and says I can't do
this operation which is tantamount to a
death sentence but he goes up to
Scotland and he goes there he is Wow
yeah it's it's incredible when you see
that painting on so Penman goes up to
Scotland and he sees a guy named James
Simon and Simon
agrees to do this operation and pemon is
sat for 24 minutes in a chair restrained
while this thing is caught out of his
face first in a bucket and and survived
yeah well we have a picture of him later
in life Wow you know and he looks like
he's doing ugly Abraham Lincoln and
Lincoln wasn't really known for his
looks I'm psyched he doesn't have that
thing in his face though yeah see that
the jaw is definitely slimmer but he
doesn't look too deform considering what
he went through so it is incredible um
you get such crazy stories like there's
a woman who has a mastectomy in 1840
without any anesthetic now at this time
you would have if you were wealthy or if
you're middle-class you'd have this
operation in your home you just have it
unlike your kitchen table which is which
would have been safer than going to the
hospitals really yeah because the
hospitals were crawling with all kinds
of infection so hospitals were places
for the poor and to give you an idea of
how gross it was the bug catcher who had
rid on the beds of lice he was paid more
than the doctors and surgeons in this
time yeah because I mean that's pretty
important right there's maggots all
kinds of things crawling around in these
hospitals
so if you were wealthy or middle-class
you had your surgeon come to your home
and so she has a surgeon come and the
surgeon determines that yes the breast
has to come off and says I'm gonna
return but I'm not gonna tell you the
day which would make me more anxious he
thought it was gonna help her not focus
on it but all you would be thinking
about right as one is this guy that's a
person without breasts it was like I'll
just show up it'll be easy and so he
shows up and he goes into her bedroom
and he opens his hand and shows that the
knife he's gonna use and he says to
prepare her soul for death but this
isn't very confidence inspired any
doctors listening don't tell your
patients to prepare their soul for death
and and she does survive and she talks
about how it's so vascular that the
blood blinds him at one point and so
like just what do you think I can't get
worse he can't see and he's under and
she is under his hand for an hour and a
half oh my god away and she survives she
ends up living a long and somewhat happy
life I'm sure she had a lot of
nightmares yeah there we see so do they
tie this woman down like how did they oh
yeah they would have definitely had to
restrain her I mean oh people were
probably a little bit stronger or more
able to adapt to pain than we are but
nonetheless there would have been some
pretty heavy what year was this that was
in the 1840s do we know when cancer
became common or was it always common in
humans that's that's a good question the
oldest archaeological record I believe
it's 2,000 years old of metastatic
cancers so it's older than you think
they're diagnosing it for for centuries
and centuries I'm not really an expert
in history of cancer but it is around
and so with breast cancer you know
probably by the time it got to the stage
of mastectomy it probably would have
spread if you think about like you know
it being visible to the naked eye but
yet she survived she did survive and so
then you'd have to question whether she
had breast cancer or maybe it was some
kind of like yeah maybe a cyst and she
went through that for that but yeah and
again it before antiseptics before
Lister comes on on and comes up with
germ fighting techniques this would have
been so dangerous because you have this
open cavity in Windows and so Joseph
lists
when he comes up with his antiseptic
techniques he actually performs a
mastectomy on his sister on his dining
room table oh right
which and she survives and that's in the
book see this this would be a great
movie don't you think yeah I do think it
would be a great movie it's like it
would be a great movie for the Coen
brothers yeah you know because it's so
chaos Ville you know and all that kind
of readiness yeah I do good period
pieces too yeah plus they could make it
more entertaining
no part of that world but this guy with
the face where they cut that tumor out
of his face so for 24 minutes that's all
it took to cut that thing out of his
face in that that case yeah and remember
a course it depended on the skill of
your surgeon so he goes to a very good
surgeon named James Syme but there
there's a story so going back to penises
there's lithotomy as the removal of the
stone which you saw kind of a
demonstration there and it was
incredibly painful so if they stuck a
rod on the penis and they cut through
the scrotum me removed the stone and of
course there was no pain medication and
it was just awful did they drink you
know it's kind of a myth because of
course drinking within your blood hmm
but someone asked me they said I heard
that surgeons would punch the patient
out and I was like oh you have to be
really good to knock someone out on a
first punch and of course he'd do more
damage you could do a lot of damage to
the head that's definitely didn't happen
unless someone can prove me wrong maybe
there's like a weird example but I've
never come across that um see so it was
kind of it was you and the surgeon and
with the lithotomy it takes about a good
surgeon it took about five minutes well
there's a guy named Steven Pollard in
1828 who goes in to have this done now
it's incredibly embarrassing it's you're
you know you're naked from the waist
down it's an embarrassing operation it's
painful
he's broadened the theater and the
surgeon ends up taking over an hour
because he's so intact and the patient
is screaming you know please just stop
just stop and on and the surgeon yells
back at him for having abnormal Anatomy
which how would you like that you're
sitting there on the on the table and
you're being blamed for this going wrong
and he pulls through the operation but
he does die
post-operative infection abnormal
Anatomy how so he just said you have ADD
normal Anatomy and so on the autopsy
report it was revealed that there was
nothing abnormal about his Anatomy the
surgeon just was really announced oh
yeah it wasn't blaming the guy did you
have lunch before this yeah I did good
that's well that's good because then you
won't faint well I hosted fear factor
I've seen everything yes nothing what's
worse I mean was there ever a segment on
fear factor that you thought I don't
know if I can watch that no no I when
they had a drink calm that was rough
yeah that was the second version of Fear
Factor when it came back for a brief
period of time and they were going way
too hard they were trying to do them so
yeah yeah they're like fear factors back
and it's crazier than ever and they just
went way over the top that's what they
do with TV right yeah always pushing the
boundaries they didn't have to yeah I
could have just gone with regular fear
factor and we would have all been fine
we could do historical fear factor
create these sort of things it was a
blessing in disguise but this this
surgery as we know it when did it first
start like what is the first historical
recounting of an actual doctor Oh or you
mean on someone something there a
licensed doctor when did it start
like like really hard questions no no I
know so little about history it's like
19th and 18th century it's it you know
we have evidence again in archeological
records of
surgical procedures going far back but
who did them they would have been you
know sometimes what they call them wise
women comedy cunning women on marver
surgeons yeah I guess there are good
razors right yes yeah actually barber
surgeons used to do things like pull
your teeth they used to blood let and so
the barber pole which is red and white
is red and white because it was
advertising their services as blood
letters so what they would do is they
would tie these bloody rags around the
pole and it would whip around the pole I
know it's one of my fav
story and and the the ball at the top
represented the bowl that would catch
the blood and the stick would have been
the stick that you held to kind of get
your veins to stick out and people were
blood left for all kinds of reasons like
you would do it like a purge or a diet
or or you would do it because you were
ill the idea being that you had produced
too much blood and you needed the blood
to be let to kind of restore balance in
your body what do you think it would be
like to go back in time and hear someone
say something that's stupid like you're
sick we need to remove some of your
blood you have too much blood in your
system you Lindsay you're gonna show
you're gonna send all of these like
crazy academic historians are like we
can't tonsorial services what does that
mean and you know what else the
barbershop quartet comes from the idea
that the barber surgeons often had a
musical lute in the office that you
would play or the patient would play was
like a musical therapy so there's all
kinds of hangovers from it and you know
the Demon Barber Sweeney Todd yes so
this is kind of a one of these stories
that pops up and they think that it
might be that medical practitioners were
trying to undermine the legitimacy of
the barbers you kind of either get this
story that the barber is this like sort
of demon figure who's chopping you up
and selling you and making you into pies
or is that a legit one because that
seems like nonsense it's well it seems
like it's a recreation no it's an order
one coil it seems like parody like look
says listen to my troubles no charge
listen to your troubles 50 cents they
might have had that on there
Barbara thing yeah when they're cutting
bullets out of you it's his bullets
removed two bucks
they're all drunk pomade mustache wax
yeah well people thought that bullets
were that gunpowder was poisonous so a
surgeon would often amputate if you were
shot Oh God until they kind of realized
that sometimes it was okay to just keep
the bullet and depending on where it was
it could just be like a recreation of
something that someone found maybe and
they're selling that as a piece maybe
right probably yeah yeah and we get that
we get the red on blue and white barber
poles now so what happened was the
barber surgeons and the surgeons split
off professional
at some point in history and so the
surgeons start to use blue and white
poles and the barbers use red and white
poles and I think now the red white blue
is is like the patriotic red white and
blue but but the traditional barber pole
would have been red and white and it
would have signified that you could come
in and get your bloodletting because
those those bloody rags would have been
out there on the pole before they had
the pole they would advertise by putting
just bowls of congealed blood in the
window oh and then in London they
decided I think it was about the 14th
century they said no more of that so the
barbers started to throw the blood into
the river which was also equal roses yes
so the barber surgeons would have
definitely been doing minor surgical
procedures and they would have been more
affordable than the surgeons and the
physicians themselves but nobody could
really do much for you in that period
according to our own sort of 21st
understand you know some 21st century
understanding but I always say to go
back to your question about you know how
would it feel to hear something so dumb
well what do you think today that you
know in a hundred years we're gonna look
back at and there's there's definitely
going to be stuff right that where I can
go I can't believe that you know in fact
I think that this is probably gonna get
people to go know that totally works you
know that that a trend of copying yeah
now that you see so that was also at
17th century so they would cup they
would have these heated cups and they
would create this blister and then they
would cut it open with this really sharp
instrument and that's how they would
bleed you so it's kind of this weird
thing that's coming back but for
slightly different reasons I don't think
there's any evidence that cupping is
real no I don't think so either and I
and I like to point people to the past
because if we're gonna make fun of you
know what they were doing in the past
it's kind of making a reappearance so to
speak but people do all kinds of weird
things now too like they eat the
placenta yeah
there's there's no medical evidence that
that has any kind of health benefit yeah
but it's edible I think yeah and can eat
it well it's funny because that actually
segues into into this lovely object this
half skull here um my friend Zane Wiley
creates these these are actually cereal
bowls right but and the reason why I
brought it was because it
opens up a conversation about something
that I like to talk about which is
corpse medicine so people used to
actually eat dead bodies for medicinal
purposes what parts so if you had
epilepsy in the early modern period some
we were like talking like 16 17 18
centuries um people would drink the
blood of an executed criminals
lost their heart like the idea was that
the life cut short that the blood was
very powerful force and so you get these
sort of drawings of people gathered at
the scaffold you know this poor bastards
gonna lose his head and these people are
like holding cops up to catch the blood
and it didn't work and epilepsy was so
awful because it was so misunderstood
and you can imagine you know when
someone goes into a seizure it's it's
it's scary and if you don't understand
what's happening you could think that
it's witchcraft or there's all kinds of
things that people thought about that
disease so these people were quite
desperate so they were drinking the
blood of executed criminals good lord
they ground-up mummies ancient mummies
and they would make it into pills and
did all the kinds of things right so I
so I always point this out we eat the
placenta today it's kind of like you
know a form of ingesting bodily uh yes
yeah so people were just super super
desperate back then yeah people I mean
of course there was not much that could
be done right but but we do some kind of
form of corpse medicine and organ
donation so we're taking dead body parts
we're not eating on but we're driven
into our body to cure ourselves
yeah I have a cadaver graft on my right
knee oh yeah really well I had a huge
fist fight you know I had some gum
disease up here and then they had to
like graft a little like piece of
cadaver bone whoa but they don't call it
cadaver bone see they call it could
everyone - you don't they call it um
freeze dry bone or something no wasn't
bone it was uh they call it an allograft
but it's it's a cadaver they use the
achilles tendon for the ACL because the
achilles tendon is much larger than an
ACL so it's stronger and if you know are
you familiar with the way it works it's
really kind
you know the way it works is not like it
takes over it's not like an organ
transplant so you don't have to worry
about your body rejecting it in the same
way although some people bodies don't
accept it it doesn't work but they take
this graft they put this new tendon in
place this new ligament in place rather
and then your body reaper LIF writes
that ligament with cells so it's even
though it'll feel like it's healed up
within like a month or two like you're
Neil feel a little bit weak from the
surgery but people get a distorted
perception of how strong it actually is
and fighters yeah in particular I know
several fighters who have wound up
re-injuring their knee because they
thought it was okay real really it was
very gummy and very weak so how long
does it take to heal before like six
months yeah yeah like six to nine months
they recommend but it's amazing what we
can do now about 150 years ago that I'm
talking about and today yeah it's just
the in and I always because I'm a big
Joseph Lister fan I always say that if
we hadn't understood germs there would
be no way to go deep into the body would
there sure yeah and so he opens up this
sort of huge field with medicine and a
lot of advanced advancements are made
off the back of it but but it was it was
a gritty time and it definitely you you
definitely could die very easily life is
very cheap back then yeah I mean yeah I
can only imagine just the the idea that
woman getting her breasts removed on her
kitchen table yeah there was a no there
was a little boy he was 12 years old his
name was Henry pace and he was told by
the surgeon he had to have his leg
removed and he said as little kids do
would it hurt and the surgeon said no
more than having a tooth polled oh he
was very unprepared so they brought him
to the operating theatre and he was so
awake and so where he remembers counting
6 strokes of the saw before his little
leg fell off why did they have to cut
his leg off he broke it and it was just
a sprain and they just decided to take
it off no I mean if there was a compound
fracture the chances of it on becoming
infected was quite high so when Lister
comes along and he's trying to figure
out what's causing infection
he notices that if it's a clean break
and there's no break in the skin usually
it heals okay but if there's a break in
the skin it gets infected and usually it
leads to some kind of gangrene or
septicemia and that's how he starts to
wonder it must be something coming from
outside and getting into this wound that
is causing the infection but he breeds
Louis Pasteur's germ theory and this is
how he starts to put it together but
when he first comes out with it you know
there's a lot of pushback because
medicine and science are essentially
conservative in the sense that it's like
puzzle solving if someone you know you
you solve the puzzle within the rules
that are already set out if someone
comes from sort of the fringe and has
this wild idea usually there's a lot of
pushback and so that's exactly what
happens with Lister and it's hard for us
to imagine because germs we understand
them today it seems obvious to us but
back then a surgeon didn't wash his
hands or his instruments because why
would he wash his hands or his
instruments if they were going to get
dirty with the next patient so that you
have to get into the mind the logical
mind of a Victorian surgeon
they wore aprons I think Jamie I'd also
sent a picture of like a surgeon with
with his apron on on actually it's a
picture of a butcher but it gives you
that kind of idea of what your friendly
Victorian surgeon would have been
wearing and that apron the more blood it
had on it it was like a sign of pride
almost because that meant that your
surgeon was very experienced and had a
lot of blood on it so that's a butcher
those similar tools of the trade yep
similar tools and certainly that apron
would have been on your surgeon I don't
know about the hat yeah I know it's kind
of like gangs of New York
you know you kind of picture they would
worn those really tall top hats and
those crazy plaid colors and it's it's a
very colorful time before Victoria
chorus plunges the nation into mourning
later so Lister is coming in along the
1840s it's very sort of colourful and
filthy and dirty
Victoria plunged the nation in the
morning well we know when her husband
died she went into sort of lifetime
mourning so she's always wearing black
for the rest of her life and everybody
follows her example so we think of the
Victorians wearing sort of all that
black but in gangs of New York a lot of
people thought that that was sort of
imagine world but actually that's what
they would have looked like they would
have been wearing those plaids and those
bright colors and those top hats but
Lister was a Quaker we think of like
Quaker Oats which is it's kind of
accurate and he would have been wearing
sort of black and white and very dull
colors so when I think about this movie
because I think about it a lot I think
about sort of this world being very
hedonistic and colourful and there's a
lot of drugs going on they're
discovering ether and all kinds of
things that they're experimenting with
and then you have this sombre Quaker and
as the movie sort of progresses the
world catches up and gets a bit cleaner
with Lister so they were experimenting
with all these drugs oh yourselves oh
yeah it was like but it was just a crazy
time so ether is so my book begins with
the first operation under anesthesia and
I wanted to start there because I think
if anybody has ever thought about the
history surgery which they might not
have until they turned into this podcast
they tend to think of that moment that's
the big moment but actually surgery
becomes much more dangerous because the
surgeon still doesn't understand germs
but he doesn't have the patient fighting
him anymore
and so he's more willing to pick up the
knife and go deeper in the body and so
post-operative infection Rises and in it
opens with the great Robert Liston and
he performs the first operation under
ether in 1846 in London and and he
doesn't think it's gonna work it comes
from America he calls it the Yankee
dodge and it's a miracle it works and
the age of agony is over when ether was
discovered everybody wanted to try it
this drug that made you insensible what
was that like and so you get these kinds
of stories of medical students sniffing
it and drinking it in fact I believe
there's still place in London you can
get an ether cocktail okay and I don't
don't endorse it it's highly inflammable
so people also smoked a lot in operating
theatres so you can imagine that there
were a lot oh yeah there are a lot of
accidents on but but you drop it on it
basically because it evaporates really
quickly you drop it on a strawberry then
you dunk it into champagne and it's
supposed to get you really high very
quickly and then it wears off equally
quickly I try to convince my publisher
to have ether cocktails a book launch
but they're like
just have a bunch of ubers ready yeah
yeah or carriages like in the Victorian
so so people were yeah definitely trying
and then of course have you tried it
I've not tried it I haven't found that
bar yet yeah there's one experiment on
the people that came to your book Lynch
great story you know probably ship your
toe in first yeah maybe maybe try it out
yeah maybe for the next book yeah but
yeah and so so you have ether in sort of
the mid 19th century and then of course
later you have cocaine
you have opium which is well actually
cocaine comes along is presented as sort
of a cure to the opiate the morphine
addiction so like take cocaine and I had
brought its in my Mary Poppins bag I'll
show it to you later after the show I
brought a a postcard that shows a
dentist and he's pulling a tooth and the
person wrote underneath just had a tooth
pulled with cocaine so they were they
were using it for all kinds of things
and doctors were becoming addicted
themselves to these drugs then heroin
comes along there invents heroin heroin
is given to your children it's put in
all kinds of things again it's um it's
positioned as you know break your
cocaine addiction now with heroin so it
just it was just a crazy period and it
was really in sort of in the early 20th
century when a lot of this stuff started
to be regulated finally Wow
I didn't bring any of that I believe
there was a mummy that was found in
ancient Egypt that tested positive for
cocaine but they think that it might be
a false positive because apparently
there's something else that they would
consume back then that would make you
test positive for cocaine I don't know
yeah Jamie I'll find it but there was it
was some it was some evidence I think
what they were trying to connect us to
now I remember they were trying to
connect this to the idea that people
from Egypt had the ability to travel to
the Americas and that someone from here
goes American drugs in ancient Egyptian
mummies can make it a little larger
Plews it says it seems safe to say that
blah-blah-blah-blah-blah in 1992 a new
study of nine mummies from ancient Egypt
quite a stir when his announced the
discovery traces of nicotine and cocaine
in their hair
both of these chemicals came from plants
found only in South America and this
research has since been touted as
evidence of pre-columbian contact
between American Africa something
thought to be impossible based on the
rest of the archaeological record so
what's going on let's start by looking
at the evidence
ba-ba-ba-ba-ba 1992 the perform by some
savolta Balaban OVA and - that's a
serious woman and two of our colleagues
at the Institute for anthropology and
well this is a in Munich they're using
German world anthropology probably in
humanities of the University in Munich
tests were carried out by nine mummies
on nine memories Munich Museum dating
from 1070 to 395 BC the study focused on
hair samples which were often used to
assess drug concentrations in the body
do the results was it say here what they
discovered all the mummies tested
positive for cocaine and hashish which
makes sense the results caused an
immediate stir what the come on let's
cut to the chase here folks first thing
to say archaeologists are not just being
stubborn about this there many reasons
not to think the traces of drugs and 9
mummies means what is it what is the
conclusion cut to the chase here folks
this is a real teen cocaine ok back up
back up cocaine stop okay
cocaine most of us think of today was
first discovered in early civilizations
the Andean region of South America that
you and the coca leaves
exactly instead the cocaine and possibly
the nicotine - were actually being
introduced to the mummies as part of an
embalming process that's interesting
whoa more likely the obtained cocaine
from America okay I don't know I give up
there's no way we'll have to read you
did a good yeah I tried yeah it just
seems like it's gonna take a long time
many resins and spices hold on a second
worse certainly used this day we aren't
entirely sure what they all were rare or
exotic materials were almost certainly
used and it is far less of a stretch
suggest this included imports from the
Middle East and potentially as far
afield as
India hmm I don't know I think they the
this is a very skeptical about the idea
that people from Egypt were able to
travel all the way to the Americas where
the cocaine was but I think I think part
of the conclusion was that there were
some other things that would make that
you test positive for cocaine oh it's
interesting what sort of like poppy
seeds make you test positive for right
you have to go for a drug test for work
they say don't eat poppy seed don't even
just hot yeah it wasn't there like a
Seinfeld I'm looking at the Wikipedia
for it to that it might have been part
of a thriving tourist scam in Egypt in
the Victorian area so they might have
like said it was there and some people
come look and then you know women said
what was there the cocaine
it says since passing these corpses off
recently deceased as ancient mummies was
a thriving tourist game in Egypt during
the Victorian era like I could have that
doesn't make sense because the tests
were done tonight after the experiments
even assuming the cocaine was actually
found on the mummies it's possible this
could have been a contamination that
occurred codes were fondling monies
those mummies because they wanted to eat
them as I said they'd be round them up
and they use that on ancient Egyptian
mummies that you have to yeah think
about how much was destroyed what do I
think about all the time this is a
fantastic exhibit almond powder Wow look
at that that is nuts mummy extract it's
cure-all whatever you got yeah fixes you
know it's a you know it's a quack remedy
when it's a cure-all we still have quite
a remedy you know take a pill lose
weight those things that are causing
people to lose weight and those
late-night infomercials yeah take a
bunch of pills yeah that's all for
modern day quackery there's a fantastic
exhibit that's right now there's an IMAX
exhibit in Los Angeles at one of the
museum's I saw it about a year ago but
they have a King Tut exhibit and then on
top of that they have this gigantic IMAX
theater which is fantastic and they show
the all these different tombs that they
discovered and how they discovered them
and but it makes you really when they've
discovered King Tut's tomb we have no
idea how many similar tombs there were
that were
over the you know yeah I think about how
much yeah absolutely I mean what we have
you know in the museum's is just sort of
a fraction yeah what we know and and
still stuff is coming to light it's just
a minimal yeah but yeah they the
Victorians are responsible for
destroying a lot and for taking those
mummies and just grounding them all
kinds of things yeah it's what what gets
me is what was the mote like where was
the theory like would the theory come
from like when you wanted to see mommy
when it in a powder some of it would
have been sort of folk medicine
influence you know there's there's this
idea of sympathetic magic so for
instance if you if I stabbed you with a
sword
let's get very violent you could be
healed if I put this sort of special
sympathetic powder on the sword it would
heal you so it was sort of this um
healing by distance so all kinds of
strange ideas existed but and that's why
it's important when you're studying the
history of medicine to really get into
the mindset because it's so wildly
different to the way we think right um
and and you know actually do you know
what this is that I brought this some if
people are just listening it's it's a
long beat mask look a bird bath shot
yeah I do not know what that is okay so
this a lot of people think this is a
Venetian mask this is actually
particularly on a particular example
from Venice it is what people would have
doctors would have worn during the
bubonic plague so it's well the plague
doctor mask and so um it was invented in
the 17th century by a French doctor and
the idea behind it was so people thought
that disease was spread by this thing
called miasma which are like little
particles in the air they're sort of
associated with bad smells so if
something smells bad it's probably not
good for you is what they thought and it
kind of makes sense because it's like
you know you're in a really if you're in
a slum area of the Victorian period it's
probably has a lot of disease it
probably doesn't smell good so that was
sort of the thinking behind it so what
you would do is you would put
sweet-smelling herbs into the beak and
so you would be smelling the scent it
would protect you from those evil miasma
whoa yeah it's you know is that a
one no we don't actually have I don't
believe there's an example of a real one
from the 17th century but there's a lot
of illustrations of the plague doctor
and he would have been wearing a hat he
would have been wearing a cape leather
gloves like sort of just protecting
himself oh there you go that's a real
one authentic 16th century plague doctor
mask preserved and on display at the
wall there you go another one dosed in
Germany Museum of medical history but I
questioned that because it was invented
in 17th centuries so if it's real it's
gonna be a little bit later interesting
but we don't know how much they were
warned because they would have been
expensive a lot of doctors weren't very
noble so the plague broke out they got
the hell out of there
there was sort of a phrase go far and go
long you know get out and don't come
back for a while it wasn't much they
could do for you they had a stick as
well that they would sort of poke the
patient with so they wouldn't have to
touch the patient and kind of have them
turn over and they can you know yes you
have the plague there wasn't much they
could do for you and we can cure this is
they did not know what what what germs
were so they really understand what the
plague was they had sort of a concept of
contagion so if you broke out with the
plague they would probably quarantine
you in your house and they put a big
cross on the door and so people would
bring food and on you you um you know
put a basket outside of your window with
a rope and you take and so they do that
until everybody was dead in the house or
that the plague had passed and they felt
that you were safe to come out into the
general population so there was an idea
that these things were contagious but
not again in the way that we kind of
understand disease diseases being spread
today it's so strange that they would
you would not know what was going on
what people just start dying and you'd
like what is it yeah it could God's
curse on and and people say you know oh
the plague mask is so terrifying on it's
super creepy but I always say that it's
good look this is why I brought this
across the Atlantic so Joe Rogan could
wear the plague doctor mask
how many people wouldn't know what that
is like if you went you know if you go
to they say plague doctor mask funny
because I was just in Venice recently
and they were saying that you know the
big carnival
that they have every year it's becoming
harder to do because of security reasons
so you have like a huge population of a
city wearing masks and covering their
identities they have to cut back which
kind of sucks because you know that's a
sign of the carnival so now they're
they're cutting back where you can wear
them in public places and things like
that but yeah fortunately we're a plague
mask can't we're played masks
I'm gonna bring it back though I'm just
gonna be walking around downtown LA how
would that attach to your face like
straps yeah there would have been straps
or in that other example he was showing
it looked like it was sort of a fool I
know there it goes
I mean that looks so creepy it's so
creepy but death today we have the
modern plague doctor what do you think
that would be yeah hazmat yeah yeah
exactly and so you think about the
hazmat going into hot zones that would
be pretty scary if you didn't know what
was going on it's certainly sort of
ominous you know when you see the hazmat
so it it's a weird thing that exists
because in a strange kind of way it
probably did protect the plague doctor
because he was covering himself up but
it protected him for the wrong reasons
he still didn't understand how diseases
spread are you aware of the theory of
alien abduction being a distant memory
of childbirth
no yeah there's a there's a theory that
is actually being tossed about that
these people that have this ancient well
they have this memory of childbirth
right so all of a sudden you're being
born there's bright lights above you
there's a man or a woman who's the
surgeon with a mask that covers their
face so all you see is their eyes okay
and everything looks bright and and it's
terrifying and clinical and you're on
this table and everything's cold
most of these alien abduction
experiences that people recount they
take place in some sort of a medical
facility yeah
and everything is bright and strange and
cold and they think that
this is is they're they're saying that
we had this idea that children don't
have memories that babies don't have
memories and so they said well why
wouldn't they have memories that's
ridiculous of course they have memories
they have brains they they grab your
finger they looked you in the eye they
would have a memory of every second that
they were born and it's probably one of
the most profound and disturbing
memories because before that everything
is incredibly peaceful inside the
mother's womb you know you're just like
taken and pulled out and then there's
this bright light above you've never
experienced any light so every and your
visual perception your field of view is
all distorted right this is the first
time using your eyes that's why people
are saying yes that's interesting this
is a theory it makes sense to me
because of you think about more sense
than the abduction so what does because
people don't really go anywhere see the
thing about the abduction thing yes they
put like cameras in people's rooms and
and they say they have these alien
abduction experiences but they don't go
anywhere so what they're doing is a
dream yeah which is the mind is amazing
and it's so powerful and we know so
little still yeah so also like these all
these that means it's kind of duh
because they all happen while you're
sleeping 90 percent they tend to be
medical yeah it's very medical in nature
right you're being examined and then
there's also going back to childbirth
there's also a lot of people that have
these experiences that they are being
told that either they're taking their
baby away from them or they're studying
their baby or that they had a baby
inside of them they didn't know about
and that the aliens have put it there
and they're taking it out right yeah
yeah I mean it even goes back to the
virgin birth right so it's all very
weird but this this memory that people
have from childhood is most likely you
know probably a pretty intense interest
memory that's always there yeah yeah and
some people can tap into it and some
people can't
yeah sure yeah yeah this was also a
theory while natural childbirth
supposed to be less traumatic like women
having natural childbirth in a bathtub
you know yeah that that is actually kind
of like moving back to you know it's men
start to get involved in childbirth
around the 17th century 18th century
before it was mostly women so women in
the village would come and actually the
term gossip comes from the idea the
women who would spread the word in the
village that someone was going into
labor they were called the gossips
negative thing later so that the gossips
would spread the word the women would
come in this was a female only chamber
on and men were not really allowed in a
man might be brought in if the mother
was dying or if the child was dying and
then in that case instruments were
brought into the birth the birthing
chambers so the doctor might come in and
he might take these sort of forceps and
a baby apart and take the baby out baby
would die but in those cases it was like
really extreme like this was gonna
happen like either the mother is gonna
die the baby was gonna die both of them
were gonna die or if the baby was coming
out feet first yeah capable Midwife
could could handle that on but this you
know the cesarean section people think
that it comes from the term that the
idea that Julius Caesar was ripped from
the womb of his mother but um it's
unlikely that that story is true because
his mother lives into old age so
probably the the term cesarean comes
from the Latin term meaning to cut and
the first sort of record we have of this
happening I think is in the sixteenth
century and it's a farmer and he takes
the instruments that he uses to castrate
his pigs to cut this baby out of his
wife yeah and and we don't have any
records of whether this it's probably
didn't work again no idea of germs all
this kind of stuff I know she lived we
yeah I don't have there's no sort of it
doesn't follow the records don't follow
the story but she probably died and the
baby probably died as well people don't
know the castrate pigs to make them more
edible the oftentimes castrate them and
then let them loose because then they
they concentrate on grass and not ass
that is a actual farmers term I I have
you know talk
about cesarean sections and castrating
pigs who knew those two things well
that's what I do well the difference
between a steer in a bowl
his steers castrated they castrate them
because they make better steaks things I
learned yeah you don't want a muscular
jacked boy exactly yeah that but that
buffalo above my friend Adam green tree
shot that in Australia and the my friend
cam was chewing on a piece of his for
one piece for half an hour oh my gosh it
was that 2,000 pounds sack of Steel so
it's not good no sit down no I mean they
say they very like sometimes some of
them you can eat yeah you know I mean
you can eat them they're all Ruffalo
yeah but they're just insanely dense
crazy how big I mean when you see the
skull it's just the size of it is
incredible yeah it's it's also an
invasive species so they have no natural
predators so there's just thousands and
thousands of destroying the countryside
and so people travel up to the northern
lands are to land I forget that the name
of the place where they go and they hunt
these things Wow
yeah they're huge yeah Australia's a
trip I mean it is really a wildlife
experiment because they brought in so
many animals and right Susie as well
yeah and they're not indigenous in there
so when you think about the history of
surgery and that you you concentrate on
this one very particular time in this
book in this book yeah but as a medical
historian like when what first were what
led you to that like why I mean I you
know I'm like that kid who never grew
out of the obsession with Tales from the
Crypt
yeah Ripley's Believe It or Not you know
the shrunken heads I actually did a
segment for a documentary in the
shrunken heads and I had to go out to
Poland I actually got to hold these
things that I was always fascinated with
growing up well people don't know that
they think the skulls in there that's
why they don't shrink the head
yeah and it's it's amazing because what
they do is that obviously they take the
skull out and it's a process and this
documentary was looking at
they were DNA testing them because the
tribe that makes these skulls they were
done for a specific purpose to trap the
soul of the warrior that they killed so
that there was a spiritual reason behind
it
but what they were finding was that some
of these shrunken heads were female um
which probably means that um as
westerners came into these areas they
wanted to collect these shrunken heads
as curiosities of course and so they
traded guns for heads and so we kind of
drove up the the demand for these these
shrunken heads so they started killing
women well it wasn't just just anybody
and it might not have been killing them
it might have just been taking bodies of
people who had already died but they
definitely aren't all authentic in the
sense that they were yeah killed in
battle and so it's just kind of an
interesting but I got to interact and
see these shrunken head so I was that
weird creepy kid that you know no one
really wanted to talk to I joke that I
was I also um looked like barb from
stranger things and my brother pointed
this out and we were watching stranger
things and then barb dies and nobody
gives a shit yes sorry sorry everybody
and I was just devastated I'm like
nobody noticed for you know like a whole
season but yeah they barely cared like
what she's missing I guess he's missing
that no one here last time we saw her by
the pool I was I was really awkward I
was five seven by the age of ten and I
was just I was just like that weird kid
with Tales from the Crypt and so I kind
of so I went on to study history in
college and then I went to Oxford and I
did a masters and PhD in it but academia
is not it's isn't doesn't allow me to be
as creative and weird as I'd like to be
so now I'm just a storyteller I'm a
freelance writer and I do this YouTube
channel and I'm sure Oxford's gonna be
like give us the PhD back can they do
that no there's a real value in that in
terms of Education because what you do
is very interesting and entertaining and
that's why I started following you and
retweeting your stuff it's really I
appreciate that you know it's funny
because there is this sort of tension
between what they call popular history
and academic history and I
get at like academic historians will
come at me on Twitter and stuff and this
one guy said to me well you're just an
entertainer and I was like well that's
not an insult to me like that's that's
not true you have a PhD yeah i stupid
yeah what school just said that yeah
like me you're just an entertainer yeah
just it's like it's like I'm
bastardizing the subject kind of you
know way that they don't like well it's
because of people like me I'm like a
grouse my retweet makes it you want it
you know like I did this thread on
Twitter called your Victorian doctors
trying to kill you and every tweet was
like Coco rats cocaine laced cigarettes
which you had also shared at one point
and just all the kinds of crazy things
and then at the end of the thread I said
but what is it about today that people
will look back but you know this one
academic was like this is really on you
know bad history and you're you're
making it fun how dare you you know that
but for the most part people enjoy it
and and that's nice well that is like
the the big complaint that people have
about academia is that it's so stuffy
yeah yeah I'm gonna get like so many
weird academics
I know it's just it's one of those
things like I've had to make peace with
um because I am a storyteller and if you
look at my profile I call myself a
storyteller first rather than historian
great stories though the see stories
list for us in 2019 are so incredibly
fortunate to have you know actual real
doctors with real modern medicine to fix
us in you know talking to a guy who's
had probably five surgeries yeah I know
I'm yeah it's god it's so I know I had
an appendectomy and it was it was
amazing they used little tiny robotic
instruments now and they they barely
make you know I think the incisions like
an inch long or something it's a buddy
of mine had shoulder surgery and the the
actual cuts are like millimeters tiny
little cuts you barely can see the scars
it's amazing and you know with your knee
surgery it was an injury from activity
right you know and you think about
people in the past they weren't
necessary well I mean there was there
were sports and competitions but mostly
people were getting injuries from
repetitive
strenuous labor
that they were doing sure there's a
story of a cab driver in the 18th
century and he got this aneurysm behind
his knees so on the cab drivers in the
18th century were these high boots like
riding boots and it would rub at the
back of the knee and it created this
huge aneurysm and there was a surgeon
named John hunter in London who said
well normally what you do is you would
hack the leg off because oh sorry God
Pop's are gonna bleed out but he said I
have an idea I want to cut into the leg
and I want to tie off the blood supply
to the aneurism I want to see if that
works and it did and you saved this
guy's leg and that's really important
because remember these people had no
options if they couldn't work a lot of
you say aneurysm you like people think
of aneurysm and think of a brain right
it's like what's the what's the term
it's um it's a specific kind of aneurysm
it's almost like a balloon that appears
on the outside
sack of blood big sack of blood why
didn't they think they could just drain
it that's what I would think if you
severed it yeah I don't know um I'd be
like slow down doc yeah don't don't heck
that leg I'll Drive this taxi bitch and
what's incredible about that story
actually is that he that hunter saves
the leg and then when the man dies right
before he dies he knows he's going to
die this is many years later he writes a
letter and he wills his body to Hunter
so this is one of the first early exact
to take the leg and took open it up and
dissect it and to see what happened and
so that way it's on display the surgeons
I'm sorry at the Royal College of
Surgeons in London so they embalmed it
yeah well he would have preserved it
probably with on wax injections almost
like plastination oh I was very torn
when I was walking around this because
what a part of me was saying this is
really fascinating and the other part of
me was saying what is the difference
between this and like fucking Ed Gein's
house where he made lampshades out of
people oh yeah I mean one would hope the
difference is consent
but one would hope though yeah woman
well there has been controversies with
certain acts exhibitions maybe not body
worlds but there's been some spin-offs
where there's been a question of where
they got those bodies yes and of course
if if you're also going into sort of
poorer areas and asking people to hand
over their bodies is it really consent
because sometimes these families don't
have money for girls and yes there's
other incentives but I think my view is
what you know it's it's given under the
guise of science that we can only view
dead bodies through the lens of science
day that's the only acceptable way but
it really is art um and I wish that it
would just be more openly recognized as
just art whether it's your kind of thing
or not because some of it is posed in
really shocking ways right that are
unnecessary to teach Anatomy right so
you know if you're going to say it's an
anatomical lesson why does the person
have to be posed in this sort of
dramatic way so I think that you know it
would be better if we just called it for
what it was it's art and it's supposed
to be provocative and shocking and
that's why people come to see it and
we're morbid curious it is absolutely
interesting yeah I mean and people say
oh my gosh the Victorians bought tickets
the operating theatre well people come
to my Instagram account you know I mean
we're still morbidly curious oh for sure
it's really interesting that it's called
a theatre as well did you ever see that
movie with Benicio del Toro though I
think was just The Wolfman it was one of
the more recent werewolf movies but he
becomes a werewolf in the operating
theatre so the doctor is convinced the
doctors convinced that he's a madman
there's something wrong with him so they
give him electric shock therapy and all
these different things and what's the
period it's supposed to be in this
period oh yeah yeah it's in London so
yes even you find it it's kind of a
crazy scene you know the doctors were
experimenting with um electricity a lot
and galvanism and things like kind of
reanimating the corpses we get the story
Ward Frankenstein um and they were also
interested in how long do you live or
your conscience after you're beheaded
right so there's these expertise
experiments during the
revolution where they're like shouting
at the heads to see if the heads will
blink Oh God so I'm sure we can't air
this on YouTube so this will only be us
watching this because if we air it on
YouTube don't do it see that's exactly
what this feeders yeah he's like saying
he's gonna kill all of them like you
need to get out of here and they this
doctor is very arrogant and they're
dealing with him and the moon turns full
and he starts freaking out and it's it's
really interesting because if this was
actually how they had patients strapped
in
is that accurate like the way that chair
is set up yeah they would have I mean so
his feet it looked like his feet were on
the ground so the chair would have been
higher so his feet would have sort of
dangled it's one of the best ever and
I'm a giant werewolf fan I mean this is
one of the best ever because this was
actually done by Rick Baker who's the
same guy who did an American Werewolf in
London which is the werewolf it's out in
the hall okay oh yeah but this is the
modern version of it that they decided
to make and you know the thing is that
these guys were watching this and the
doctors arigon has his back to the
patient while he's discussing and it's
exactly what those cheaters would have
looked like as well yeah but they would
have been just so crowded that is so
strange though that this was like this
was entertainment this was something
that people wanted to say well you know
it wasn't just sort of the morbid
curiosity it was also that the
Victorians were obsessed with scientific
progress so they wanted to come in and
see right I see that they want to see
what they're trying for people are
listening yeah this is a it's not a good
movie but it's a it's a great scene
there's a bunch of great scenes in this
movie I enjoy it just because I love
werewolf movies yeah yeah it would have
been fun to shoot yeah well it's um it's
also they decided in this movie to make
it with minimal use of CGI and yeah what
they decided to do is do it all with
perceptual yeah rubber masks and things
like that pretty ridiculous movies
it actually it's funny because um it
sort of reminds me of again Liston the
the 6-2 giant he got a patient on the
table who had to have a bladder Stern
remember how awful that was and this guy
was like fuck it I'm not gonna do it he
jumps off the table he runs across the
room locks himself in a closet and
Liston Liston all 6 two of them chases
this guy rips the door off and just
drags him back oh my god so you know and
that really happens again be a great
movie anybody listening yeah pushing
this movie alright are you trying to
sell that while you're out here no I
mean I'm I guarantee you someone is
listening to me I think I I you know I
could sell the rights to the book but
I've held on to him and I'm developing
them with my producing partner because
this book was born out of a lot of
traumas so a couple years ago I went
through a really bad divorce and I was
facing deportation as a result from the
UK and so I had no money they took my
passport everything like I couldn't do
anything so I wrote this book and so I
always say that Joseph Lister saved a
lot of lives not least my own because
it's kind of lifted me and it's been a
rebirth so I really want to be involved
in the process I've always been
fascinated with movies I want to kind of
see how the sausage is made sort of
speak you know if you're a writer and
you just sawed off the rights or not you
don't really have much creative input at
all right but yeah I just think that you
know it's it's a great story because
it's it sort of crosses with the with
people who are interested in the horror
genre right because you get the the
surgery the Victorian surgery but it's
an uplifting story about something that
changed the world and the way we
fundamentally understand it who you
envision playing Lister I see Bradley
Cooper yeah yeah he's like
quintessential movie star right yes yeah
I was thinking on Eddie Redmayne the
British actor who's like he's so sweet
and whiskers are very sort of who's that
girl he's in on fantastic beasts and
where to find them the the Harry Potter
he's he's really big in Britain or
Benedict Cumberbatch but that guy's
awesome yeah it's strange
I think Benedict Cumberbatch would like
to play Liston the 6-2 guy because it's
a real theatrical role well come
he's another guy who's awesome and
everything amazing yeah yeah so if
you're listening Benedict he's killer
and Doc dr. strange is another movie
that's not the best movie in the world
but he's killer in it yeah and he's tall
you know he could play list any good
he's you know we could Balcombe out a
bit and ah there we go
does he have to be the patient you don't
want to be the guy that dies when it's
code
/d Ike's yeah I'll be that guy I'll be
the guy with faith yeah so this book
sort of you were in quite a bit of
personal anguish yourself so you have
this deep attachment to it I can it's my
first book and I'm working on an um a
new book on the history of plastic
surgery uh-huh
any fast name with that as well yeah
it's it's interest so I'm looking at a
guy named Harold gillies who was
rebuilding soldiers faces during World
War one and if you've ever seen these
guys photos I mean it's we have no
problems you know you you think we have
no problems in the 21st century you look
at these guys because they've been shot
through the face and their jaws are
missing and Harold gillies on really
designs or starts plastic surgery as we
know it and it was a time when losing a
limb made you a hero but losing your
face made you a monster so these guys
are really isolated and so what gillies
does is he gives them their identity
back so it starts on the battlefields of
World War one and it's gonna kind of
follow gillies throughout I like to do
character-driven stories even though
they're 100% true I like to sort of
follow medical history through the eyes
of one particular person Wow
yeah the the history of plastic surgery
is fascinating to me and I'm hooked on
that show botched oh yeah
people always I'm sure is so great this
is me watching box this is me all the
time doing man stop doing them what
people put themselves through right and
I started following some plastic
surgeons on Instagram just to kind of
know what what you know they're doing
today and and thinking about the ethics
of how they target people on social
media
and how do we feel about that and I'm
telling you I'm 37 I'm feeling bad about
my body I can't imagine if you're like
14 and awkward in your barb you know and
you and you have access to these
accounts and the effect it has on young
people on Instagram and everything well
I had Johnathan hate on the podcast who
wrote this book the coddling of the
American mind and one of the big things
that he discusses is people comparing
themselves to others through social
media and children particularly girls
yeah this higher instances of suicide
cutting depression much higher instances
of depression I believe yeah I believe
it too it's crazy and then you see
someone like Kylie Jenner who transforms
herself literally from an ugly duckling
to a beautiful swan yeah yeah and it's
all done through the knife and it's it's
great and that'sthat's the whole thing
like that that kind of beauty is
unattainable release or oh yeah this
gentleman is Harold gillies on one of
his patients and well that's the end
yeah and what he did was on he invented
this thing called the tube pedicle where
he would take skin and he would he
basically create a tube and he can place
it somewhere on the face where the
defect was and the blood supply would
make it attach and the guy did an
incredible job
I mean first nerd 19 that's probably
1917 right there that's like better than
a lot of the people on botched the final
product and that skill ease down down
there that yeah that's another man no he
was incredible and really when you think
about what these guys went through -
yeah um so the so my book is starting
with this guy named Pierce eclair who
shot through both cheeks and his face is
just blowing off and to get off the
battlefield was half the struggle
because if your face is blowing off most
of the time the stretcher bearers will
just pass you up because they think
you're gonna die but it was a survivable
wound and so just getting off the
battlefield you know so you sit there
for 12 hours oh my god died in the
process you know food you can't eat no
food and that was the other thing so a
lot of these guys died because well
intending nurses would lay them down and
if you don't have a jaw your tongue
slips back into your throat
any joke yeah how are you suffocated so
so just getting to Harold gillies
hospital so he starts this incredible
facial and jaw unit in Britain during
the war just to get there was a battle
and then you have to go through all
these painful operations and so I want
to look at that and then of course like
how does that become what we do today
but equally I always tell people that
botched is one form of plastic surgery
but of course there's a lot of important
surgeons doing reconstructive work
yeah um you know and now we have face
transplants which are incredible I don't
know Jamie if you can find someone who's
had a face transplant but there's been
quite a few yeah there's there's you
know the I think the hardest part is
finding the donor mm-hmm it's hard to
get people to donate their organs as it
is but think about a face is so personal
yeah and the last one National
Geographic did a spread on it and was I
18 I think it was an 18 year old girl
who shot herself in the face and in a
moment of rage and um and anyway she
ended up having this face transplant
about three years later and the the
donor face I think with someone who was
in their 30s this person had died I
think of an overdose and then the family
decided to give this face over so it's
it's actually incredible what we can do
when you think about you know from the
battlefields of World War one to what
Gilly is doing to where we are today
with facial reconstruction and it's just
going to get better and better yeah I'm
sure it is gonna get better and better
and for people with disfavour in
injuries and things it's fantastic yeah
what freaks me out about botched is the
psychological aspect of people
constantly tinkering with their looks it
is yeah and now they have apps where you
can upload your face and you can change
things about your face and it's just
we're we're all becoming more and more
insecure I think with social media and
and yeah it's part of this world where
we where nothing is real that's the
other part of it this a lot of these
pictures aren't real now people are
doctoring their photos to make themself
look different than they actually do
look and they know someone walks into
the studio and you're like wait that's
not what I thought that person was going
to look like this woman who's friends
with my wife her neighbor is a model
and she takes all of her photos with no
makeup on and then they put the makeup
on her oh my god yeah that's how they do
it they do it all through Photoshop so
she can do whatever you turn into an
avatar but it's kind of crazy that they
they take photos with no makeup and then
nothing's real nothing is real anymore
we kind of just thinks we're mean I
don't want to go down this road in this
conversation but I think we're preparing
ourselves for a time where nothing is
real I mean I think preparing ourselves
for a time where we live inside some
sort of a simulation yeah and I think on
it's interesting because celebrities
like yourself have to really think about
how your image is used after you're gone
as well now like something that you
didn't have to think about so there was
a commercial with Audrey Hepburn in
Britain and she's it's it's a galaxy
chocolate commercial and she's there and
it looks like she's eating a chocolate
bar and so the ways that they can
manipulate images and and I think for
the first time a lot of celebrities need
to really think carefully about whether
they're okay with their images being
used in certain kinds of ways after
their death like who owns your image
it's just like when you look at medical
history in the past you don't own your
body and so a lot of these surgeons get
hold of these bodies to dissect and
they're digging them up from from
graveyards there were Body Snatchers
they called themselves resurrection men
and they would go into these cemeteries
and they would do these bodies and they
would oftentimes strip the body naked
because it was it was illegal to steal
possessions from the corpse but not the
body itself because there was no I there
was no concept of the body being sort of
property so they would throw the clothes
back into the grave and and they were
really clever in the ways they did it
they usually sent a woman in the daytime
to masquerade as a mourner and she would
kind of go through the graveyard and she
would see where the fresh graves were
because of course you'd want the body to
be as fresh as possible and then at
nighttime they would go in there and
they would dig up these bodies and they
could take as many as 12 bodies in a
night it was like hard labor and it was
very lucrative
because the only legal bodies to dissect
in Britain in the early 19th century
were bodies of executed criminals of
people who had murdered other people's
so silly went to the like to say goodbye
dear Nana and drop some flowers on her
grave and there's just a big hole in the
ground well they would cover it up but
you do get these stories of people
finding out that a body so for instance
I think it was in 1785 on this person
goes to this graveyard and discovers
that a body is missing that a body has
been snatched and everybody in the
village goes to this graveyard and digs
up their relatives and drags these
coffins back to their home until they
could make the cemetery safer oh my
which is insane because people were
really feared this and so yesterday on
Twitter I put up a picture of something
called the cemetery gun so they had
these devices that they would put at the
foot of the grave and it had like a
tripwire and so you can set up the gun
to shoot anybody good god and there's
actually a really awful story of a
grieving father who this was set up at
the grave and he accidentally trips it
and he gets shot so you know it wasn't
it wasn't exactly a safe way to protect
the bodies but they also had Watchmen
look there it is this for your for your
twitter feed that's twitter yes cemetary
gun 19th century used to protect against
Body Snatchers that is so crazy it's a
musket yeah it was hardcore I mean you'd
have to be quite wealthy as well to set
something like that up at the at the
foot of your relatives grave they also
use coffin collars so that was sort of
like an iron well it was it was a collar
and they would nail it to the bottom of
the coffin so that way so what what a
Body Snatcher would typically do is just
opened the foot of the grave he wouldn't
dig up the whole grave he'd smash open
the lid and he'd have instruments to
kind of drag the body out well if the
corpse is nailed to the bottom of the
coffin you're gonna have a lot of
trouble dragging that body out so people
you know they did all kinds of things
they put these cages over the over the
graves to protect them so people the
Internet
god bless its will say to protect
against vampire or to keep vampires from
coming I they had nothing
that or zombies it was to prevent
body-snatchers from getting a hold of
those corpses but you know those by
business yeah there they are mort's
safes they were called oh my god
and you'll see him a lot in Britain um
and there they were people were very
paranoid about this I mean you can find
a lot of examples of this and bodies
were stolen a lot and thank God they
were on some level right because think
about how much we learnt from these
bodies bodies were needed to be
dissected to teach medical students yeah
and one of the scenes in the book I talk
about the dead house they called it the
dead house and everybody had a different
experience in the dead house there's
probably people listening who've been in
a dissection room and you have a really
vivid memory of that it's probably
bright and white and clinical well these
places the bodies would have been
bloated and partly decomposed dissecting
bodies was dangerous because you could
cut yourself and you could infect
yourself with bacteria they weren't
wearing gloves and so you get examples
of people cutting themselves and dying
within 48 hours so going into medicine
was dangerous and there's a story in
this book about a guy who goes into the
the dead house for the first time and he
freaks out and he sees all these like
mice and rats and things like that
eating the body and so he jumps out the
window and he runs off but later he
becomes accustomed to it as we all
become accustomed to horrible things at
some point and he actually starts taking
pieces of the corpse and throwing it to
the poor little starving creatures that
are on the dead house and she's yeah so
it's kind of like you know that that
horror that we all experience possibly
when we when we were confronted with
death to accepting it as you have to as
a medical student if you want to go on
so the dead house is is particularly it
would have smelled dissection would have
would have been a winter sport because
the bodies wouldn't decompose as quickly
you course wouldn't want to be
dissecting in the heat of the summer did
they literally have seasons for
dissection
yeah they would they would tend to teach
students in the winter so they wear like
winter jackets and they would have
probably because well they had a
fireplace at the end of the room as well
make a really stuff
smelly right and you couldn't really
predict what a person had died from as
well so remember people are dying from
things like smallpox which is awful yeah
and this is before bass vaccinations
this is certainly before antibiotics and
so a lot of doctors or medical students
died as a result of going into the
profession oh wow
so there are they getting it from these
corpses they can get a bacterial
infection certainly and just being with
patients if a patient comes in with
smallpox and in smallpox a lot of people
I don't know if I did I send you a
picture of smallpox Jamie a lot of
people think oh it's it's like
chickenpox like not like chickenpox it's
it's a really awful disease and it's the
only disease that we have eradicated
ever in human history yeah which is
incredible so it's it's one of those
ones the other yeah that's unbelievable
children with it it's just and it was so
common it was very common it was it was
very feared as well because it was so
disfiguring and so know if you were for
instance a wealthy woman and you got
smallpox and you were scarred your
family might worry that they couldn't
marry you off so you know it was one of
those diseases that left its mark on you
literally and and it also had a high
mortality rate as well but it wasn't
like chicken pox no there's my my PSA
like chicken pox well it's you know it's
one of those things that we're so
thankful that people have figured out
how to get rid of something yeah and and
in smallpox vaccine was invented in 18th
century most people don't know it's it's
that old that's terrible
yeah Edward Jenner invented it and
actually the biggest anti-vaxxer
movement or protest happened in 19th
century hundred thousand people turned
out to march in Britain against Jenner
people thought that on their children
would turn into cows because he used cow
pox the virus cow pox to bestow immunity
onto people and so there was this huge
fear that you know it was dirty to kind
of insert this animal virus into people
and so there was this big protest a
hundred thousand people to protest the
fact that six parents had been jailed
for not vaccinating their children and
so this
is much older than we think and the
fears that we have about vaccines are or
not that's a similar to what people
worried about in the past as well but
Jenner is an incredible figure that is
incredible when you stop and think about
the fact that this is still going on
today with the internet yeah yeah all
the mean you can find out I mean I had
dr. Peter Hotez on recently to talk
about vaccines and and the
misconceptions that people have and he
explained that they have isolated a
bunch of different environmental factors
that and genes that contribute to autism
but that it all takes place in the womb
right people want to hear that no I mean
and that is the danger of the way
information is now spread of course echo
chambers it is you know it's
confirmation bias is the real danger
wasn't it was actually harder to get
that message out but a lot of you know
you get famous sort of cartoons of of
people sort of turning the cows or the
cartoonists my new husband is
cartoonists and so it's like this this
way of this powerful way of kind of
conveying images and fears and stuff and
so yeah people people had that fear of
vaccines for a long time but Edward
Jenner coming up with his vaccine
undoubtedly saved millions of people's
lives undoubtedly yeah it's just so it's
so amazing that that's the problem is
still around today we even with all the
information that we have available yeah
I think you know there was on Fox News
newscaster who recently said that he
doesn't wash his hands because he can't
see germs I don't know who what he was
joking hopefully you said the next day
he actually washed his hands so so
people were sending that to me because
again like this dirt right and and I I
always tell people you know it is that
idea of what you can't see it's hard to
convince people and with Lister you know
if you think about it here's this young
guy and he's coming along he's saying
there's these invisible little creatures
and they're killing your patients and
trust me I have this really weird
instrument called a microscope and I can
see them and it was a leap of faith
he was also accusing the older surgeons
of inadvertently killing their patients
because if they weren't washing their
hands they were leading to higher
mortality rates so they probably fought
against it as well yeah so there was
there was
huge pushback so what Lister ultimately
does is he turns to the younger
generation and he changes their minds
and so it's a slow burn it's not like
you know the movie moment unfortunately
where it just happens all in once and it
takes quite a long time on and it's it's
weird that it takes so long because if
you think about him coming in 1876 to
America it's after the Civil War people
were dying soldiers were dying of high
infection rates they were packing wounds
with mud I mean they couldn't get worse
than that right and so people were dying
of all these all these kinds of
infections he comes to Philadelphia to
convince the medical community and
speaker after speaker just denounces him
on the first day and then he gets up and
he does his demonstrations and he starts
to slowly change people's minds but it
takes a long time the the cover of the
of the American book is on the American
version I should say is a famous
painting by people and see that by
Samuel gross it's called the gross
clinic um the guy in the middle
it is gross as well but the guy in the
middle of Samuel gross and he so didn't
believe in Lister that he would walk
into the room and he'd slam the door and
he'd say there mr. Lister's germs can't
get in anymore and you can see in this
that he's sticky he's wearing his street
clothes he's sticking his dirty fingers
into this wound and there's a woman in
the background and she's um covering her
face and she's the mother of the patient
and she's wearing black because she
expects her son to die so so this is the
u.s. cover and for the UK cover I think
I sent that to you Jamie
um it's I sent you a picture of both
covers side by side it's another
painting by Eakins and it was done
within ten years and it's called the
Agnew clinic and it's totally different
because the doctors are wearing white
there's a sense that they understand
germs there's a sense that antisepsis is
being used there so that kind of
before-and-after shot in such a short
period that Lister is able to change the
world what made you choose different
covers for the UK and the US version
well so that's actually writers don't oh
there you go so you can see so penguin
published it in the UK so they've
stylized the original painting but you
kind of get a sense of what it would
have looked like um and actually you
have women appearing in the operating
theatre professionally as nurses so this
is after the Florence Nightingale
revolution as well
it still looks different the way we
operate but you can definitely see a
difference between those two paintings
you refresh my memory in the Florence
Nightingale Revolution so Florence
Nightingale is a in this book a little
bit people always wonder why I didn't
speak about her as much but actually she
didn't believe in germs at first she
thought Wooster was quite hysterical
with his idea of germs but she was
working towards sanitation in hospitals
so they're working towards the same goal
but just with different it's slightly
different tactics so she revolutionizes
nursing to make it a more respectable
profession before then nurses you
wouldn't want your daughter becoming a
nurse if you were from a well-respected
family because it was she would be privy
to the male body so you wouldn't want
her interacting with male patients so
really kind of lowly on poor women went
into nursing and it wasn't really a
respected profession until Florence
Nightingale comes along and there's this
sort of revolution so the revolution is
not just about the profession though but
it's about the sanitation reforms that
she brings about in hospitals so you see
that on the cover as well but there's
there's also another guy I'm sure
there's like I can I always like sort of
predicts comments I shouldn't think
about you know what people are gonna say
but people tend to get mad on like when
I give lectures cuz I don't talk about
this guy there's there's groupies out
there that love this physician named
Semmelweis and I do talk about him in
the book a little bit so Semmelweis was
this disease I call him groupies
Semmelweis groupies because every time I
give a talk there's always one person
who asked this question and I have to
spell myself and I'm like ah here it is
and they say why I think you'll find you
haven't talked about Semmelweis
Semmelweis was was practicing in austria
and he was putting this idea together
that if you wash your hands and you go
on to the hospital wards infection rates
went down and they call he was ridiculed
heavily they called him the hand washer
and he ends up being put in insane
asylum and it's really kind of sad weird
death that he has and and he's really
sort of persecuted for these ideas of
hand-washing and and infection rates
he's doing it a little bit before Lister
comes onto the scene Lister's not aware
of some of Isis work but equally I
always tell people that some
voice doesn't really do it first if we
if we're gonna play that game because
again there's a difference between the
basic sanitation and then understanding
why you're implementing it so until you
understand that germs exist it doesn't
make sense you can't really convince
people and that's where Lister comes in
he takes loo pastor's germ theory and
he's able to convince people in the
medical community that germs exist hmm
so until we understand you know again
why wash your hands if they're just
gonna get dirty that's amazing so again
why did you have two different covers oh
yes so the publisher just picks whatever
covers they want basically on so my us
publisher had come up with this my UK
publisher came up with a cover I didn't
like that much and so I said well why
don't we use the second Ekans painting
so that they're in conversation with one
another so I like that
I like the font better on the US cover I
know I love this Victorian font and I
think the image of that guy wearing
street clothes is just more it's so
evocative you know it's just this book
this cover actually so it's been
translated to think in about 15
languages now so most of them kind of
take this this image I was wondering if
you knew what this might be this is so
it's a circular metal metal contraption
with teeth on the inside gorgeous no
idea what this is called the jus
Campinas this is an victorian
anti-masturbation device what yeah
there's the real one this is this is a
prop that I use for under the knife
that's the real one so what would happen
is if the person got an erection it
would clamp down and obviously kill the
erection pretty quickly can I say that
yeah that's one we made for the show
yeah but it's basically yeah it's
similar if you see like the one on the
screen it has device so these they were
trying why were they trying to get
people to stop master though the
Victorians were obsessed with with
masturbation and there's probably a lot
of people out there who know that
Kellogg's cornflakes came out of this
sort of obsession
yes patient please tell people that
story we heard it from dr. Chris Ryan oh
it's so funny well it's funny in a haha
kind of horrifying way
Kellogg was was obsessed with with
masturbation he thought that a lot of
his patients were suffering from all
kinds of mental ailments and physical
ailments because they were masturbating
too much and he thought that a diet
bland in bland and high in fiber would
kind of kill the fire in the belly and
so he invented what became Kellogg's
Corn Flakes dream but his brother was
the one who commercialized and his
brothers like we should add sugar and
dr. Kellogg was like no people we
masturbating all the time we can't add
sugar you know and they had this like
sweat and Kellogg's cornflakes became
the commercial version with the
delicious sugar added in so that was the
brothers idea it was the brothers idea
to add the sugar and make it sort of
delicious oh yeah
oh yeah that's that was illustrated by
my husband we do all kinds of did that
yeah oh so that's not original no we
read your son and heir is it becoming a
dirty little self abuser stop all
contemptible is this an actual text cock
lane in London no but there is stop all
contemptible onanism what is onanism
masturbating and onanism with the
infallible and modestly priced jigum
penis so was that a common thing during
the Victorian era so yeah you get I mean
the idea that masturbating is bad for
your health goes to the 18th century we
kind of tend to think about it is a
Victorian obsession because it becomes
more and more accepted idea in medical
terms but it's bad for you that it's bad
for you and you get these like sort of
drawings of men like languishing on the
couch was it masturbated too much or a
lot of dudes out there right now there
can relate they just need the jiggin
penis and and also there's another one I
sent you Jamie I think the this sort of
like looks like a flaccid penis doesn't
rather once it's really high yeah they
came in all shapes and sizes and oh boy
yeah like now it would probably just be
yeah are you supposed to pee out of that
yeah maybe you could
at the end of it like you have to just
imagine what that thing smelled like oh
Christ look at that ball at the bottom
with the hook that seems super
uncomfortable it's in between your legs
so it must be like a hook where you
could strap it in strap it in that's
like a tie steel cup I don't know who's
coming on the show afterwards but they
got a lot of Funches
good news is Ron is a hilarious comedian
so we might have to redo the entire show
just with Ron yeah just show me I'll
just leave these objects behind and you
had the cop do so it's so gross in fact
you two pee out of those like a
spaghetti strainer at the end of it I
knew I thought you know when I was going
on the show I'm like what can I bring
joe rogan that's gonna you know
stimulate the conversation and the anti
masturbation device so he's a crowd
pleaser well with men they thought that
it was causing all these ailments they
thought it was causing all these
different problems yeah and graham
crackers as well come out of that so
Reverend Graham was also obsessed with
masturbation just like Kellogg and so he
created this sort of dry tasteless
biscuit so everybody you know crumbling
them into there no Wow little did he
know that someone who's at s'mores now
you know I don't know if it works if
people feel like that that's helping
them with their masturbation problems
but hey leave a comment what's just
crazy that people didn't most people
have no idea that that was the origin of
this that's what's so funny you know
there's there's so many like Listerine
graham crackers Kellogg corn flakes all
this kind of stuff that that has sort of
a medical background and wasn't there a
medical background in the term
hysterical that hysterical was related
to women yeah the idea that the wanders
like that the female womb was like an
animal of it which you know and it would
move
the body and so you they would even do
things like they would smoke it back
into place they'd put like smoke they
would put like incense and all kinds of
things to kind of like get it like coax
it back into place I can't even imagine
the people are gonna start following me
after this but there was there was a
time where women would go to the doctor
to get stimulated as well right is that
true so this is like a little bit out of
my expertise I think that's been proven
to be false actually um but but there
was I believe and I could be wrong on
this that there was a Victorian idea
that a woman had to orgasm in order to
become pregnant yes so that was that was
an important part of it I wasn't just a
Victorian thing I'm pretty sure they
taught me that in high school you want
to get a woman pregnant part of the idea
was as part of the male orgasming inside
the woman was what led to her having an
orgasm which would led to her getting
pregnant
that is weird well there was there was
might have completely removed correctly
again so I was probably 15 at the time
well there you go
but there was there was someone um I
think it was like a senator Congress I
live in the UK now so I'm not as
with all the crazy stuff going on over
here
but I think there was like a senator who
said this again this idea that a woman
had to like orgasm it meaning
undermining the idea that you couldn't
be raped right unless you had an orgasm
which was a Victorian I remember leave
yeah I think that was really recently
yeah I think it was like in the last
year like I really do room I mean I have
to just be like in the background
popping up and like I could have like a
sign that says 18th century or 19 that
you know let's where did that idea come
from originally and that's I do have
this weird weird vague memory that that
was the way that that you were taught
Catalan but it's it's too weird they
don't remember I don't it's it's too
vague you know it does sound like I now
I picture you went to like a really
Victorian school it's a place called
Newtons
and it's suburb of Boston really nice
cool nothing wrong with other other than
your sex ads I'm not sure if that was
they did smack our hands oh it caught us
masturbate so why were people so
obsessed with that while they obsess
self-pleasuring yeah and I think that
again you know you look at that sort of
buttoned up Victorian mentality and put
like dresses over the legs of pianos and
chairs and stuff like they did it might
be more bullshit than I remember
but I really do remember something okay
oh okay you know what I remember where I
heard it from I heard it from Terence
Mckenna
it was one of the things he talked about
during one of his his speeches yeah
that's right we did we did fact check
that I mean we like to think that that
the past is really different from us
which it is in some ways but you know
again like we still share some similar
fears and the masturbation thing
actually the last thing I want to show
you that I brought is this so this is
this is a urine wheel that would have
date to the medieval period and so the
idea was that the doctor could diagnose
you according to the color of your urine
spoiler alert if your urines black
you're probably in big trouble you
robbed oh yeah and things just yeah they
didn't just um look at the colour they
tasted the urine is well hilarious so
and they could diagnose diabetes because
someone with diabetes their urine tastes
sweet so they were actually diagnosing
every part of of the urine in the
medieval period and doctors with your
they some some practitioners would take
the urine and put it into a divination
Bowl and they could tell your future and
I think they should bring that back like
you know at the end of your checkup you
know not to be covered by insurance but
you know okay if they test your urine
and you're totally dehydrated and
blood in there like yeah bro you ain't
gonna make it do that well it's weird
that image in the the whole circle the
the center circle like that this a guy
is the doctor holding the flask yes is
that the doctor yep that would be the
doctor holding the flat skin actually
took a wine taster school taster I did a
whole again a YouTube video on this
which is why I have this stupid prop and
we we cut through images in that image
of the doctor holding the flask was sort
of the predominant image of a physician
up into a certain period now it's sort
of like the stethoscope is the is the
object now that we associate with
doctors but we'll ask you stay here in
flask used to be it and yeah they're
called urine flask in a doctors poll
younger poll and in the plague mask oh
my god but they used to call them piss
prophets because they they tell your
fortune use your urines oh my god shit I
think that is something we should bring
back
I think you bring that back well you
know what if there's tarot card readers
one as prophets yeah at least piss
prophets are basing it on something yeah
you know your urine into that divination
Bowl I know there's so many images of
the doctor holding the flask in
obviously like the car of your urine
could be an indicator of health it still
is okay and look at the guys like what
you think doc store right now
look at those the band-aid around the
guy's head yeah like he's hurting the
guy's got a head injury in the doctor
shop is the next image what was going on
there oh Christ
yeah actually on the barbers when they
pulled teeth that sometimes they would
have a drum in the shop and it would get
louder as they got closer to point the
tooth which would make me more ink oh my
god
and the barber shop was was a male
domain because you would also get advice
on sexual diseases because of course
everybody had syphilis oh right so this
is a fake nose so everybody sort of lost
their noses
okay so something you probably don't
something you probably don't know about
syphilis I don't know if we have that
image of um of syphilis that I I sent
poor Jamie I told your bookie manager
Matt Staggs I said send these images to
Jamie and don't tell him any contacts if
Allah summit acts sort of the soft
tissue and the image that I sent through
which he'll show in a minute on the the
guy has holes in his scalp as well oh
wow that's a photograph that is a
photograph of his head his nose though
so you could just cover that with a hat
oh yes but it was it was incredibly
painful and you Al Capone had syphilis
and so you lost your mind it attacked
this long GG's brain it was really two
people today you know I'll show these
images on my Instagram or Twitter and
people will be like wow I didn't know
syphilis was so bad people died from it
all the time
well syphilis is also responsible for
powdered wigs you know that story right
no when it was I forget some noble
person got syphilis and started wearing
wig yeah and when they started wearing
wigs other people started emulating them
because they were the celebrities of the
kingdom this is a drunk history is
legitimate and the more wealthy you were
like because syphilis makes your hair
fall out as well yeah fall out
yeah and so the more wealthy you were
the bigger and taller your wig would be
that is where the time big wigs comes
from oh that's interesting I mean I knew
that in the 18th century that the wigs
were getting bigger is that like the
fashions in fact my husband illustrated
book called the gin link is that and as
it's sort of like an 18th century
newspaper and as the newspaper moves on
the women would have to sit at the
bottom of the carriage because their
wigs were so high in some cases but if
the women had syphilis oh my gosh after
surely it would be passed on or so
that's probably why they had wigs as
well
yeah and
with syphilis you know your nose fell
off and it was so prevalent in the 19th
century that they had no nose clubs so
people would get together yeah and they
would in London they would cheer the
fact that you know they couldn't smell
anything either no I mean it was awful
and actually one of the ways that they
treated syphilis was through mercury
which is and so when you talk about this
uh nose Club writers and yeah I
understand they were top hats and
underwear yeah pull up the thing know
about bigwigs so I can see do you see
that one right up there oh yeah if you
go up wait up Jamie and go yes so that
man didn't lose his nose to syphilis but
that's an early form of rhinoplasty that
dates back to the Renaissance and you'd
have to stay in that position for weeks
while that grafted I believe this had a
sakata visit for people just listening
there's a slice off of his arm that's
connected to his nose and they have
taped and strapped his arm to the top of
his head so he sustained this position
while his the trunk of his arm grows
into his face and then they're gonna cut
it and remove it when it develops its
own blood supply it's like it's like the
Nick if people have watched that show
the Nick on they have a scene with this
so yeah it was it's so uncomfortable I'm
better off with no nose yeah you might
be better off and mercury of course you
would lose your teeth and it just really
awful kinds of things that just didn't
work no and how long did that last for
the mercury thing uh all the way into
the 19th century
and so Frasier a bunch of people died
when they go hey guys no copying you
know basing this on yeah okay syphilis
hidden between powder ways syphilis
epidemic in late 1500s year of left
people with patchy hair loss go to go to
the actual the who was it was what yeah
so these noblemen they were all gross
disgusting people with STDs what but
what is the name of the guy hold on
don't scroll go back up here it yeah
okay there it is louis xiv only 17
his mom started thing worried the
baldest might hurt his reputation Louie
hired 48 wigmaker's to save his image
five years later king of so but if you
scroll down yes both men likely had
syphilis so this is what started it all
out well they were modern sensibilities
like that just looks so bizarre well not
only yeah I mean everything right no
one's washing themselves that tries me
crazy when people want to pretend there
are terrible things about life today
there absolutely are but this is the
best time to be alive ever by far yeah
people say on is this the best time
medically and it's like well hopefully
that's always true right hopefully
tomorrow is the is better than you know
hopefully we're advancing and learning
more and everything I mean I think that
you know we shouldn't look at science
and medicine is totally linear like that
we're progressing towards something um
but that you know obviously we're
learning from what doesn't work and like
that's why I said failure is a huge part
of what I love to talk about and on
YouTube and stuff because we just don't
talk about it enough and with and
science and medicine and all the things
that fail and help us get to where we
are today
well Lindsey thank you thank you for
writing this awesome book and thank you
for your amazing Twitter feed I've been
spending many many many moments freaking
the fuck out reading your stuff and
watching your images I'm really happy
you could come down here and share all
this stuff with us thank you so much
appreciate the show tell people how to
get a hold of you on Instagram how they
can check out your feed okay mom I'm dr.
Lindsey Fitzharris on instagram and dr.
Lindsey Fitz on on Twitter and under the
knife on YouTube and the book is the
butchering art you can get it on Amazon
I really love it if you bought it
they're gonna buy it it's really good
it's really good a free job thank you so
much so much bye everybody
[Applause]
[Music]